Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: lung volumes,
compliance and the work of breathing. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the lung volumes and capacities, and how they are measured.
The total volume of the lungs is divided into four volumes which combine into
capacities, a framework for describing ventilation.
The four volumes are: the tidal volume, the volume of a normal breath,
about five hundred millilitres; the inspiratory reserve volume,
the extra that can be inspired beyond a tidal breath;
the expiratory reserve volume, the extra that can be expired beyond a tidal
expiration; and the residual volume,
that remaining in the lung after a maximal expiration, which cannot be exhaled.
The capacities are sums of these: the vital capacity is the maximum that can be
exhaled after a maximum inspiration; the total lung capacity is the whole;
the inspiratory capacity is a tidal plus inspiratory reserve; and, importantly,
the functional residual capacity is the volume remaining after a normal tidal
expiration — the resting volume.
Most are measured by spirometry, but those including the residual volume — the
residual volume itself, the functional residual capacity and the total lung
capacity — cannot, since that gas cannot be exhaled,
and are measured by gas dilution, washout or body plethysmography.
So the lung volumes — tidal, inspiratory and expiratory reserve,
and residual — combine into the vital capacity, total lung capacity,
inspiratory capacity and functional residual capacity;
measured by spirometry except those containing the residual volume,
which require gas dilution or plethysmography — the framework of lung volumes.
What is the functional residual capacity and why is it important?
The functional residual capacity is the volume of gas remaining in the lungs at the
end of a normal, quiet expiration — the resting volume of the lung,
about two and a half to three litres — and it is set at the point where the inward
recoil of the lung balances the outward recoil of the chest wall.
It is physiologically very important for several reasons.
First, it acts as a reservoir of oxygen:
because it remains in the lung between breaths,
it continues to oxygenate the blood during expiration,
smoothing the alveolar gas tensions,
and it provides a store of oxygen that delays desaturation during apnoea — the
basis of pre-oxygenation.
Second, it keeps the alveoli and small airways open,
preventing their collapse and the consequences for gas exchange.
Third, by keeping the lung on a favourable part of its compliance curve,
it minimises the work of breathing.
The functional residual capacity is reduced by many factors important in
anaesthesia.
So the functional residual capacity is the resting end-expiratory lung volume,
where lung and chest-wall recoils balance;
it is important as an oxygen reservoir delaying desaturation,
in keeping airways open, and in minimising the work of breathing — a capacity whose
reduction by anaesthesia and other factors predisposes to hypoxaemia and collapse.
Define compliance and describe the pressure-volume curve of the lung.
Compliance is the measure of the distensibility of the lung — how easily it expands
— defined as the change in volume per unit change in the distending,
transpulmonary, pressure; a high compliance means an easily distended lung,
a low compliance a stiff one.
The relationship between the volume of the lung and the distending pressure is
shown by the pressure-volume curve,
plotted with lung volume on the vertical axis against transpulmonary pressure on
the horizontal axis.
The curve is not a straight line but sigmoid:
it is steep — compliant — in the middle range of normal breathing,
where a small change in pressure produces a large change in volume,
but it flattens at high volumes, as the lung approaches its elastic limit and
becomes stiffer, and at very low volumes.
The compliance is the slope of this curve. A further feature is hysteresis:
the inflation and deflation limbs differ,
the curve following a different path on inflation than deflation,
owing largely to surface tension and surfactant.
So compliance is the change in lung volume per unit change in transpulmonary
pressure — the distensibility; the pressure-volume curve is sigmoid,
steep and compliant in the normal range but flattening at high volumes,
with hysteresis between inflation and deflation — the slope giving the compliance,
a central property of the lung.
What factors affect lung compliance?
Lung compliance is affected by anything that alters the elastic properties of the
lung or the surface tension, and also, importantly,
by the lung volume at which it is measured.
Considering the lung itself: compliance is reduced — the lung made stiffer — by
conditions that increase elastic tissue or fibrosis, such as pulmonary fibrosis;
by anything increasing surface tension or reducing surfactant,
as in the respiratory distress syndromes; by pulmonary oedema and congestion;
by collapse or consolidation reducing the aerated lung;
and by raised pulmonary blood volume.
Compliance is increased — the lung more distensible — in emphysema,
where the destruction of elastic tissue reduces recoil, and with age.
Compliance also depends on lung volume and size:
it is lower at the extremes of the pressure-volume curve,
and a larger lung is more compliant, so specific compliance corrects for size.
The compliance of the whole respiratory system also includes the chest wall.
So lung compliance is reduced by fibrosis,
increased surface tension or reduced surfactant, oedema, collapse and congestion,
and increased in emphysema and with age;
it also varies with the lung volume and size — factors determining the stiffness of
the lung and the work needed to breathe.
Describe the work of breathing and its components.
The work of breathing is the work the respiratory muscles must do to move air in
and out, overcoming the impedances of the respiratory system,
and it is normally small — only a few per cent of the body's oxygen consumption at
rest — but can rise greatly in disease.
It has two main components.
The first is the elastic work, done to overcome the elastic recoil of the lung and
chest wall in expanding them — the work to stretch the elastic tissue and overcome
surface tension; this is stored as potential energy and is greater when compliance
is low, as in stiff lungs.
The second is the resistive, or non-elastic, work,
done to overcome the resistance to airflow in the airways and the friction of
tissues; this is dissipated as heat and is greater when airway resistance is high,
as in obstruction, and at high flow rates.
On a pressure-volume diagram, the elastic work is represented by the area under the
compliance curve, and the resistive work by the area between the inspiratory path
and that curve.
So the work of breathing overcomes the elastic recoil — elastic work,
greater with low compliance — and the airway and tissue resistance — resistive
work, greater with high resistance and flow;
normally a small fraction of oxygen consumption but greatly increased in stiff or
obstructed lungs, a determinant of respiratory effort and fatigue.
Is there an optimal respiratory rate, and why?
Yes — for a given alveolar ventilation,
there is an optimal respiratory rate that minimises the total work of breathing,
and this arises from the opposite ways in which the two components of work vary
with the pattern of breathing.
The principle is that a given alveolar ventilation can be achieved by many
combinations of tidal volume and rate, but the work depends on the combination.
If the breathing is slow and deep — a low rate with large tidal volumes — the
elastic work is high, because large volumes require stretching the lung far up its
compliance curve, but the resistive work is low, because the flow rates are low.
If the breathing is rapid and shallow — a high rate with small tidal volumes — the
elastic work is low but the resistive work is high,
because of the higher flow rates. The total work, the sum of these,
is therefore minimised at an intermediate rate.
The body tends to adopt the rate that minimises work, and this optimum shifts:
towards slow, deep breathing when resistance is high, and rapid,
shallow breathing when the lungs are stiff.
So there is an optimal respiratory rate minimising total work,
because elastic work favours slow deep breathing and resistive work favours rapid
shallow breathing; the body adopts the rate minimising work,
shifting to slow deep breaths in obstruction and rapid shallow breaths in stiff
lungs — an adaptation seen in respiratory disease.
What is the relevance of lung volumes and compliance to anaesthesia?
Lung volumes and compliance are highly relevant to anaesthesia,
centring on the functional residual capacity and the changes anaesthesia produces.
The induction of anaesthesia and the supine position reduce the functional residual
capacity substantially, which, together with the loss of muscle tone,
promotes airway closure and collapse of the dependent lung — atelectasis — reducing
the oxygen reservoir and impairing gas exchange,
a major cause of perioperative hypoxaemia.
This underlies the importance of pre-oxygenation,
which fills the functional residual capacity with oxygen to delay desaturation
during the apnoea of induction, and the use of positive end-expiratory pressure and
recruitment manoeuvres to counter collapse.
Changes in compliance — from the patient's disease, from the position,
from the surgery and from anaesthesia itself — affect the pressures needed for
ventilation and are monitored.
So lung volumes and compliance are central to anaesthesia:
anaesthesia reduces the functional residual capacity,
causing atelectasis and hypoxaemia, which pre-oxygenation,
positive end-expiratory pressure and recruitment counter;
and changes in compliance affect ventilation — making these among the most
practically important respiratory measurements in anaesthetic practice.
Pull it together: how do the elastic properties of the lung determine breathing at
rest?
I would draw it together around the elastic properties of the lung and chest wall
as the determinants of the resting state and the work of quiet breathing.
The functional residual capacity, the resting volume,
is set where the inward elastic recoil of the lung balances the outward recoil of
the chest wall — the point of minimal elastic energy.
From this volume, breathing moves the lung along the steep,
compliant part of its pressure-volume curve,
where the elastic work of each breath is least; the compliance,
the slope of that curve, determines how much pressure the muscles must generate for
each breath.
The surface tension, moderated by surfactant,
is a major part of this elastic behaviour and of the hysteresis of the curve.
The total work of breathing combines this elastic work with the resistive work,
and is minimised by an optimal pattern.
Anaesthesia disturbs all of this, chiefly by lowering the functional residual
capacity.
So the elastic properties — the balanced recoils setting the functional residual
capacity, the compliance determining the elastic work,
and surface tension moderated by surfactant — determine the resting lung volume and
the work of quiet breathing on the favourable part of the pressure-volume curve;
a system whose disturbance by anaesthesia underlies much perioperative respiratory
morbidity.
Describe the closing capacity and its relationship to the functional residual
capacity.
The closing capacity is the lung volume at which the small,
dependent airways begin to close during expiration,
and its relationship to the functional residual capacity is critical,
because if airways close during normal breathing, gas exchange is impaired.
As the lung deflates towards the residual volume,
the small airways in the dependent regions, which lack cartilaginous support,
are progressively narrowed and eventually closed by the surrounding pressure,
trapping gas behind them.
The volume at which this closure begins is the closing capacity.
Normally, in a healthy young adult,
the closing capacity is well below the functional residual capacity,
so the airways stay open throughout normal tidal breathing.
However, the closing capacity rises with age, and with smoking and disease,
while the functional residual capacity falls with the supine position and
anaesthesia, so that the two may cross:
when the closing capacity exceeds the functional residual capacity,
airways close during tidal breathing,
causing areas of low ventilation-perfusion ratio and shunt, and hypoxaemia.
So the closing capacity is the volume at which dependent airways begin to close;
normally below the functional residual capacity, it rises with age and disease,
while the functional residual capacity falls supine and under anaesthesia,
so that airway closure intrudes into tidal breathing when closing capacity exceeds
functional residual capacity — a major mechanism of perioperative and age-related
hypoxaemia.
What factors reduce the functional residual capacity?
Many factors reduce the functional residual capacity,
and because of its importance as an oxygen store and in keeping airways open,
their effects are clinically significant,
particularly in combination around anaesthesia.
The supine position reduces it substantially compared with the upright,
as the abdominal contents displace the diaphragm; the head-down position more so.
Anaesthesia reduces it, by abolishing muscle tone and altering the chest wall,
and paralysis adds to this.
Obesity markedly reduces it, the heavy chest and abdomen loading the system and
promoting airway closure. Pregnancy reduces it,
the gravid uterus displacing the diaphragm.
Abdominal distension, pain limiting inspiration,
and restrictive lung or chest-wall disease all reduce it.
Many of these coincide in the anaesthetised, supine,
perhaps obese or pregnant patient, so the reduction can be large,
predisposing to airway closure and hypoxaemia.
So the functional residual capacity is reduced by the supine and head-down
positions, anaesthesia and paralysis, obesity, pregnancy,
abdominal distension and restrictive disease — factors that frequently coincide
perioperatively to produce a large fall, with airway closure and hypoxaemia,
explaining the vulnerability of the anaesthetised patient and the value of
pre-oxygenation and positive end-expiratory pressure.
Distinguish static from dynamic compliance,
and describe how compliance is monitored in a ventilated patient.
Compliance can be measured under static or dynamic conditions,
and the distinction is informative.
Static compliance is measured under conditions of no airflow — when the lung is
held at a given volume and the pressure is allowed to stabilise — so it reflects
purely the elastic properties of the lung, free of any resistive component.
Dynamic compliance is measured during normal breathing, with airflow occurring,
so it is influenced by airway resistance as well as elastance,
and may differ from the static value,
particularly at high respiratory rates and in disease,
when it falls below the static value because slow units fail to fill — frequency
dependence.
In a mechanically ventilated patient,
compliance is readily monitored from the ventilator measurements: the static,
or quasi-static, compliance is estimated as the tidal volume divided by the
difference between the plateau pressure — measured during an inspiratory pause with
no flow — and the end-expiratory pressure;
while using the peak pressure instead gives a dynamic value reflecting resistance
as well.
A fall in compliance signals stiffening of the lung or chest wall.
So static compliance, measured without airflow, reflects pure elastance,
while dynamic compliance, measured during flow,
also reflects resistance and falls at high rates;
in ventilated patients compliance is monitored as tidal volume over the
plateau-minus-end-expiratory pressure,
a fall signalling stiffening — a useful continuous measure of respiratory mechanics.
Describe hysteresis of the pressure-volume curve and the role of surfactant.
Hysteresis is the property of the pressure-volume curve of the lung whereby the
inflation and the deflation limbs follow different paths,
so that the volume at a given pressure is greater during deflation than during
inflation, the curve forming a loop.
It reflects that energy is dissipated in the cycle,
and it arises chiefly from the behaviour of surface tension at the air-liquid
interface and the action of surfactant.
On inflation from a low volume, a relatively high pressure is needed to begin to
open and expand the collapsed alveoli,
because the surface tension is high and the alveoli small — the surfactant film
being compressed and less effective; once opened, they fill more easily.
On deflation, the surfactant, now spread and concentrated as the alveoli shrink,
lowers the surface tension more effectively,
so the alveoli stay open to a lower pressure,
and the lung holds more volume at a given pressure than on inflation.
This is why a higher pressure is needed to open collapsed lung than to keep it open
— relevant to recruitment and positive end-expiratory pressure.
So hysteresis is the difference between the inflation and deflation limbs of the
pressure-volume curve, the lung holding more volume on deflation;
it arises from surface tension and surfactant,
more pressure being needed to open alveoli than to keep them open — the basis of
recruitment manoeuvres and of maintaining lung volume with positive end-expiratory
pressure.
Describe the methods of measuring the functional residual capacity.
Because the functional residual capacity contains the residual volume,
which cannot be exhaled, it cannot be measured by spirometry,
and three indirect methods are used, of which the principles are instructive.
The first is the helium dilution method, a closed-circuit technique:
the patient rebreathes from a circuit containing a known volume and concentration
of an inert, insoluble tracer gas such as helium;
the gas distributes into the lung and is diluted by the gas already present,
and from the fall in its concentration the unknown lung volume is calculated by
conservation of mass.
The second is the nitrogen washout method, an open-circuit technique:
the patient breathes pure oxygen, washing the nitrogen out of the lungs,
and from the total volume and concentration of nitrogen collected,
the original lung volume that contained it is calculated.
Both these measure only the gas in communication with the airways.
The third, body plethysmography, uses Boyle's law:
changes in mouth pressure and box volume during breathing efforts against a shutter
give the thoracic gas volume, including any trapped gas,
so it may read higher in disease.
So the functional residual capacity is measured by helium dilution and nitrogen
washout — which measure communicating gas by tracer dilution or washout — and by
body plethysmography, which uses Boyle's law to measure all thoracic gas including
trapped gas; the indirect methods needed because this volume cannot be exhaled.
Describe the time course of pre-oxygenation and its physiological basis.
Pre-oxygenation, the breathing of a high concentration of oxygen before the
induction of anaesthesia, is performed to fill the functional residual capacity
with oxygen, providing a reservoir that delays arterial desaturation during the
apnoea of induction and intubation,
and its basis lies in replacing the nitrogen of the functional residual capacity
with oxygen — denitrogenation.
Normally the functional residual capacity contains mostly nitrogen,
a useless store; breathing high-concentration oxygen washes this out and replaces
it with oxygen, so that the few-litre functional residual capacity becomes a large
oxygen store.
During the subsequent apnoea, the body continues to consume oxygen from this store,
and the time to desaturation is greatly prolonged — from around a minute on air to
several minutes after effective pre-oxygenation in a healthy adult.
The process follows an exponential time course,
effective denitrogenation taking around three minutes of tidal breathing,
or being achieved more quickly with several deep breaths.
The benefit is reduced by anything lowering the functional residual capacity or
raising oxygen consumption — obesity, pregnancy, children, the critically ill.
So pre-oxygenation fills the functional residual capacity with oxygen by
denitrogenation, creating a reservoir that delays desaturation in apnoea from about
a minute to several; it follows an exponential time course over about three
minutes, and is less effective when functional residual capacity is low or oxygen
demand high — a fundamental safety measure before induction.
Describe the effect of positive end-expiratory pressure on lung volume and
compliance.
Positive end-expiratory pressure is the application of a positive pressure at the
end of expiration during mechanical ventilation,
preventing the airway pressure from returning to zero,
and its principal effect is to increase the functional residual capacity and to
counteract the collapse of alveoli,
with consequences for compliance and oxygenation.
By holding a positive pressure at end-expiration,
it increases the end-expiratory lung volume — in effect restoring or augmenting the
functional residual capacity that anaesthesia has reduced.
This re-expands and keeps open alveoli that would otherwise collapse,
recruiting collapsed lung and preventing the cyclical opening and closing of
unstable alveoli; by reducing the shunt through collapsed lung,
it improves oxygenation.
Its effect on compliance depends on the starting point:
if it recruits collapsed lung, moving it onto a more favourable part of the
pressure-volume curve, compliance improves;
but excessive positive end-expiratory pressure overdistends already-open alveoli,
moving them onto the flat upper part of the curve,
reducing compliance and impeding the circulation.
So positive end-expiratory pressure increases the functional residual capacity,
recruiting and stabilising alveoli and reducing shunt to improve oxygenation;
it improves compliance when it recruits collapsed lung but reduces it and impairs
the circulation when excessive — a key tool whose level must be optimised,
applying the physiology of lung volumes and compliance.
Summarise the importance of the functional residual capacity in anaesthesia.
I would summarise it by saying that the functional residual capacity is perhaps the
single most important respiratory volume in anaesthesia,
because so many anaesthetic problems stem from its reduction.
Its physiological roles are to act as an oxygen reservoir between breaths,
to keep the small airways and alveoli open, and to keep the lung on a favourable,
compliant part of its pressure-volume curve.
Anaesthesia reduces it, through the loss of muscle tone, the supine position,
and the upward displacement of the diaphragm,
and this reduction is exaggerated by obesity, pregnancy and the head-down position.
The consequences flow directly: a smaller oxygen reservoir,
so faster desaturation in apnoea; airway closure and atelectasis,
especially when the closing capacity exceeds the reduced functional residual
capacity, causing shunt and hypoxaemia.
The countermeasures all aim to preserve or restore it:
pre-oxygenation to fill it with oxygen,
and positive end-expiratory pressure and recruitment to restore its volume.
So the functional residual capacity is central to anaesthesia as the oxygen
reservoir that keeps airways open and the lung compliant;
its reduction by anaesthesia, position and patient factors causes faster
desaturation, airway closure, atelectasis and hypoxaemia,
countered by pre-oxygenation, positive end-expiratory pressure and recruitment —
making its preservation a constant aim of anaesthetic respiratory care.
Describe the pressure-volume loop of the ventilated lung and the recognition of
overdistension.
During mechanical ventilation, plotting the airway pressure against the delivered
volume produces a dynamic pressure-volume loop for each breath,
which is displayed by modern ventilators and is informative about the mechanics and
about safe ventilation.
The loop is traced as pressure and volume rise together during inspiration and fall
during expiration, enclosing an area that represents the work done against
resistance, and its overall slope reflects the compliance.
Two features are clinically useful.
At the lower end, a change in slope — a lower inflection point — may indicate the
pressure at which collapsed alveoli are recruited and begin to open,
suggesting a level of positive end-expiratory pressure to keep them open.
At the upper end, a flattening of the loop — an upper inflection point,
where the curve becomes more horizontal — indicates that the lung is becoming
overdistended, further pressure yielding little additional volume,
a sign that the tidal volume or pressure is excessive and risks injuring the lung.
Recognising this beaking of the loop guides the limitation of tidal volume and
pressure.
So the ventilator pressure-volume loop displays the breath's mechanics,
its slope reflecting compliance; a lower inflection point may guide positive
end-expiratory pressure to recruit alveoli, and an upper inflection point,
the flattening or beaking of the loop,
warns of overdistension — guiding lung-protective ventilation.
Describe intrinsic, or auto, positive end-expiratory pressure and dynamic
hyperinflation.
Intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure, also called auto-PEEP,
is a positive alveolar pressure persisting at the end of expiration that arises not
from the ventilator but from incomplete emptying of the lung,
and it is an important and sometimes hidden problem in mechanical ventilation.
It occurs when there is insufficient time for the lung to empty fully before the
next breath begins, so that gas is progressively trapped and the lung volume rises
— dynamic hyperinflation — leaving a positive pressure in the alveoli at
end-expiration.
This happens when expiration is prolonged by high airway resistance,
as in asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
or when the expiratory time is too short, as with a high respiratory rate.
The consequences are several: the trapped gas and raised pressure impede venous
return and can cause hypotension; the hyperinflation increases the work of
breathing and flattens the diaphragm;
and the patient must generate the auto-PEEP pressure before triggering the
ventilator.
It is detected by an expiratory hold and by observing that expiratory flow has not
reached zero before the next breath.
So intrinsic positive end-expiratory pressure is gas trapping from incomplete
expiration, causing dynamic hyperinflation with a positive end-expiratory alveolar
pressure; it arises with high resistance or inadequate expiratory time,
impedes venous return, increases work,
and hinders triggering — detected by an expiratory hold and managed by prolonging
expiration.
Describe recruitment manoeuvres and their rationale.
A recruitment manoeuvre is the deliberate,
transient application of a raised airway pressure to re-open collapsed alveoli,
and its rationale rests directly on the hysteresis of the pressure-volume curve —
that a higher pressure is needed to open collapsed lung than to keep it open.
Under anaesthesia, atelectasis develops in the dependent lung,
creating shunt and impairing oxygenation;
this collapsed lung will not re-expand at normal tidal pressures, because,
as the inflation limb of the pressure-volume curve shows,
a substantial opening pressure is required.
A recruitment manoeuvre applies a sustained or stepwise high airway pressure — for
example a sustained inflation, or progressively increased pressures — sufficient to
exceed this opening pressure and re-expand the collapsed alveoli.
Having opened them, a level of positive end-expiratory pressure is then maintained
to keep them open, exploiting the deflation limb of the curve,
on which the alveoli remain open at lower pressures.
The manoeuvre improves compliance and oxygenation,
but the high pressures transiently impede venous return and may cause hypotension,
so it must be used with care.
So a recruitment manoeuvre transiently applies a high airway pressure to re-open
collapsed alveoli, overcoming the opening pressure shown by the inflation limb of
the pressure-volume curve, followed by positive end-expiratory pressure to keep
them open — improving compliance and oxygenation,
at the cost of a transient fall in venous return;
a practical application of pulmonary hysteresis.
How does anaesthesia affect the compliance of the lung and of the chest wall
separately?
Anaesthesia affects the compliance of the respiratory system,
and it is instructive to consider the lung and the chest wall separately,
because they are affected differently and the change in the total reflects both.
The total respiratory compliance falls under anaesthesia.
Part of this is a reduction in the compliance of the lung itself,
attributable largely to the development of atelectasis:
as dependent lung collapses, the aerated lung available is reduced,
and the collapsed regions are stiff, so the lung becomes less compliant;
some increase in surface tension may also contribute.
Part is a change in the chest wall:
the loss of muscle tone alters the chest-wall mechanics,
and the position of the diaphragm changes,
while paralysis renders the chest wall passive;
the chest-wall compliance may change in either direction,
and in the supine and paralysed state the loading by the abdominal contents
effectively stiffens it.
The net effect is a reduced total respiratory compliance,
requiring higher pressures to ventilate.
So anaesthesia reduces total respiratory compliance through a fall in lung
compliance, chiefly from atelectasis reducing the aerated lung,
and through changes in chest-wall compliance from loss of tone,
altered diaphragmatic position and paralysis with abdominal loading — the combined
effect requiring higher ventilating pressures,
and the atelectatic component being the target of recruitment and positive
end-expiratory pressure.
What is specific compliance, and why is it useful?
Specific compliance is the compliance of the lung corrected for its size,
and it is a useful concept because compliance itself depends on lung volume,
so that a simple comparison of compliance between lungs of different sizes can be
misleading.
The reason for the correction is that a larger lung,
having more alveoli in parallel, is intrinsically more compliant than a smaller one
of the same tissue properties, just as more springs in parallel stretch more
easily; so an infant's small lung has a low absolute compliance and an adult's a
high one, yet the lung tissue may be identical in its distensibility.
To compare the intrinsic elastic properties,
the compliance is divided by the lung volume at which it is measured —
conventionally the functional residual capacity — giving the specific compliance,
the compliance per unit lung volume.
When this is done, the specific compliance is found to be similar across species
and ages, showing that the differences in absolute compliance reflect differences
in size rather than in the tissue.
So specific compliance is the compliance divided by the lung volume,
correcting for size; it is useful because absolute compliance varies with lung size
— larger lungs being more compliant — so only the specific compliance reflects the
intrinsic distensibility of the lung tissue,
allowing valid comparison between lungs of different sizes.
Describe the neonatal respiratory distress syndrome and the role of surfactant.
The neonatal respiratory distress syndrome is a condition of the premature newborn
caused by a deficiency of surfactant,
and it is the clearest demonstration of the importance of surfactant to lung
mechanics.
Surfactant is produced by the type two pneumocytes,
but its production does not become adequate until late in gestation;
so the infant born prematurely, before sufficient surfactant has developed,
has lungs deficient in it.
Without adequate surfactant, the alveolar surface tension is high and,
by the law of Laplace, the alveoli are unstable and tend to collapse,
the smaller emptying into the larger; the lungs are therefore stiff,
with a low compliance, and prone to widespread collapse.
The infant must generate large pressures to inflate the stiff lungs,
the work of breathing is high, and the collapse causes shunt and severe hypoxaemia,
with respiratory failure.
The condition is prevented or ameliorated by giving the mother corticosteroids
before a preterm birth to accelerate surfactant maturation,
and treated by giving exogenous surfactant and respiratory support.
So the neonatal respiratory distress syndrome results from surfactant deficiency in
the premature infant, giving high surface tension, unstable collapsing alveoli,
stiff non-compliant lungs, a high work of breathing, shunt and hypoxaemia;
prevented by antenatal corticosteroids and treated with exogenous surfactant — a
direct clinical illustration of surfactant's role in lung mechanics.
What is meant by the oxygen cost of breathing?
The oxygen cost of breathing is the amount of oxygen consumed by the respiratory
muscles in performing the work of breathing,
and it is normally a small fraction of the body's total oxygen consumption,
but it can rise greatly and become significant in disease.
At rest, the work of breathing is small,
and the respiratory muscles consume only a few per cent — around one to two per
cent — of the total oxygen consumption.
As ventilation increases, the work of breathing rises,
and so does the oxygen consumed by the respiratory muscles; importantly,
the relationship is not linear but accelerates,
so that at very high levels of ventilation the oxygen cost of breathing rises
steeply.
In severe respiratory disease, where the work of breathing is greatly increased by
stiff lungs or high airway resistance,
the respiratory muscles may consume a large proportion of the total oxygen — a
substantial fraction in extreme cases — so that much of any extra oxygen taken up
is consumed by the very muscles obtaining it,
a self-defeating situation contributing to respiratory failure and fatigue.
This is part of the rationale for mechanical ventilation,
which takes over the work and frees that oxygen.
So the oxygen cost of breathing is the oxygen consumed by the respiratory muscles,
normally only a few per cent of the total but rising steeply at high ventilation
and in disease, where it may consume a large fraction of the oxygen taken up —
contributing to fatigue and failure, and a reason for ventilatory support.
Contrast the breathing patterns adopted in obstructive and restrictive disease.
Patients adapt their pattern of breathing — the combination of tidal volume and
respiratory rate — to minimise the work of breathing,
and because obstructive and restrictive diseases increase different components of
the work, they lead to opposite patterns,
an application of the concept of the optimal respiratory rate.
The total work of breathing has an elastic component,
increased when the lungs are stiff, and a resistive component,
increased when the airways are obstructed;
the body adopts the rate that minimises the sum.
In restrictive disease, where the lungs are stiff and the elastic work is high,
large tidal volumes are costly, so the patient minimises work by breathing rapidly
and shallowly — a high rate with small tidal volumes — reducing the elastic work at
the expense of resistive work and dead-space ventilation.
In obstructive disease, where the airways are narrowed and the resistive work is
high, especially at high flow rates,
the patient minimises work by breathing slowly and deeply — a low rate with larger
tidal volumes and a prolonged expiration — reducing the resistive work and allowing
time for the obstructed lung to empty.
So in restrictive disease, with high elastic work,
breathing becomes rapid and shallow; in obstructive disease,
with high resistive work, it becomes slow and deep with prolonged expiration —
opposite patterns, each minimising the dominant component of the work of breathing,
and recognisable clinical signs of the type of disease.
Thank you. A thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Lung volumes (tidal, inspiratory & expiratory reserve,
residual) combine into capacities (vital capacity, total lung capacity,
inspiratory capacity, and the functional residual capacity — the resting
end-expiratory volume); spirometry measures all except those containing the
residual volume, which need gas dilution, washout or body plethysmography.
Second, The functional residual capacity (~2.5-3 L) is set where lung and
chest-wall recoils balance; it is an oxygen reservoir delaying desaturation in
apnoea (basis of pre-oxygenation), keeps airways open,
and minimises the work of breathing — its reduction predisposing to hypoxaemia and
collapse.
Third, Compliance = change in volume ÷ change in transpulmonary pressure
(distensibility); the pressure-volume curve is sigmoid — steep/compliant in the
normal range, flattening at high volumes — with hysteresis between inflation and
deflation from surface tension/surfactant; the slope gives the compliance.
Fourth, Compliance is reduced by fibrosis,
raised surface tension or reduced surfactant, oedema, collapse and congestion,
and increased in emphysema and with age;
the work of breathing has an elastic component (greater with low compliance,
favouring slow deep breaths) and a resistive component (greater with high
resistance/flow, favouring rapid shallow breaths),
so total work is minimised at an intermediate, adaptable rate.
5.
Anaesthesia and the supine position reduce the functional residual capacity,
causing atelectasis and hypoxaemia — countered by pre-oxygenation,
PEEP and recruitment manoeuvres; compliance changes from disease, position,
surgery and anaesthesia affect ventilation,
making these the most practically important respiratory measurements in anaesthesia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.